For the most part, we've seen a lot of
government shutdowns. We have yet to see
a government shutdown
result in widespread municipal credit
pressure. But what I will also say is
every single shutdown is different.
>> Hi everyone, I'm Gunjen Banerjee
>> and I'm Telus Deos. Welcome to another
episode of WSJ's Take on the Week.
>> This week we have a big conversation
about municipal bonds. Before that
though, tell us I want to get into gold
a little bit because I think a lot of
people are scratching their heads
thinking why is the stock market at a
record but gold is also at a record.
>> And normally that would be telling you
different things. You buy stocks because
you're excited about the future. You buy
gold because you're worried about the
future.
>> Exactly. That's a really great way to
put it. Like gold is supposed to be this
kind of safe haven. Right now it's
showing all of these jitters about
things like a government shutdown. Some
people are worried about a bubble. Some
people are worried about the economy. So
they're bidding up the prices of gold
and yet the stock market records keep
keep coming.
>> So what's going on? Uh the strategists
at JP Morgan I think had a useful term.
They call it the debasement trade. In
short, it means the dollar is in
debasement is sort of the view I think
that that people have. And that means
that people are worried about the US
dollar. That could be for any number of
reasons. One is because they think that
inflation is going to make their dollars
worth less. And so they want to hold
something that maintains its value, i.e.
gold. They also might be worried about
the US's fiscal future. Uh is the US
government spending too much money and
therefore again you know there's going
to be future inflation or that treasury
bonds are not going to be a good
investment and so they want to buy gold.
There's also questions about the Federal
Reserve's independence. That is part of
the same thing. There's the government
shutdown. All of that just causes this
uncertainty about the US's kind of
future position. And people just say, "I
don't necessarily want to own US
dollars. I don't know what's going to
happen to them. I don't trust them that
they're going to maintain their value
into the future. So, I want to hold
things in something that I think will
maintain their value." And that gold is
one of the primary beneficiaries of
that.
>> And of course, there's worries about the
government shutdown and the economy and
things like that.
>> Yes. So gold is traditionally, I think
people would call it a riskoff trade.
Buying stocks is a risk on trade. And
yet we're seeing the risk off and the
risk on trade happened at the same time.
What's interesting though is that gold
is not the only beneficiary of this
trade. What what else?
>> Silver.
>> Silver. Silver. Absolutely.
>> Silver has been on a run.
>> Precious metals. But but but it's
something it's something that's
precious, but you can't touch it.
>> You love a quiz. Uh Teladimos loves a
quiz. Bitcoin.
>> Bitcoin. and it's Bitcoin. Bitcoin is
also seen as a beneficiary of this
debasement trade. And in fact, the
iShares Bitcoin Trust ETF, remember, you
know, there was all this hullaloo about
whether they're going to launch Bitcoin
ETFs. Uh well, they did and they're
doing extremely well. In fact, for Black
Rockck, it is uh the um fastest growing
ETF of all time. I think that's across
asset managers. Oh, wow. Black Rockck
who who sponsors this ETF now generates
more revenue from that fund than all of
its larger offerings.
>> What?
>> Because it's it's got a higher fee
because you know Bitcoin is a sort of
specialized asset.
>> So people don't care about fees when it
comes to the Bitcoin trade.
>> It seems people are pretty excited about
the price of Bitcoin. And I'll give you
one example why. So those same
strategists at JP Morgan were talking
about this debasement trade and
Bitcoin's role in it. And what they were
saying was that based on how well gold
has done and the volatility in the gold
market, they were saying that that
basically implies that the price of
Bitcoin should be around $165,000 a
coin. Right now, it's more in the
neighborhood of like $110,000. Okay? So,
we're talking about potentially $50,000
in upside just from not even, you know,
accelerating this trade further, but
just from what the price maybe ought to
be now based on what's happening with
gold
>> to the moon. So, I don't think anybody
cares about a basis point or two of fees
when they're looking at that kind of
upside.
>> I do think there are other kind of
warning signs that have emerged that
kind of echo what we're seeing in the
gold market. The Journal had this really
great story recently about what's going
on in the luxury home sales market. And
luxury home sales, think, you know,
homes worth $5 million, $10 million,
>> a place to park money to to keep it
safe, right? Historically,
>> by one measure, the luxury home sales
market recently had its worst 3-month
period since at least 2013. That's
telling you that, you know, home buyers,
people with money are maybe just playing
it a little bit safer right now and and
not making big purchases.
>> Well, and that maybe they're worried
about an asset bubble, right? Maybe they
think that the price of luxury homes has
gotten too high in the same way people
think that the price of the stock market
has gotten too high. Here's another
element of that, right? We recently had
the largest leverage buyout ever.
Electronic Arts was taken over by a
group of private investors um for $55
billion.
Is that the sign of oh, everyone's
excited now about, you know, they're not
as worried about the economy. Interest
rates are probably coming down. This is
the time to start placing bets. Everyone
was expecting a big M&A boom when Trump
took office and now maybe that's finally
arriving. We've gotten through a lot of
the volatility around tariffs. Uh
obviously, you know, government
shutdowns are, uh, you know, not
something that necessarily makes people
feel good, but at the same time doesn't
derail kind of the market's optimism.
And so now the question is whether or
not another record setting leverage
buyout is a sign of more good times to
come or is it a market top signal. So I
think that this disconnect will probably
just continue for a while. I don't think
anything necessarily has to resolve it
anytime soon.
>> I think a lot of it does depend on how
the economy does, right? Do we fall into
a recession? It was really interesting.
I had this conversation with Nene
Jenkins, the head of municipal research
at JP Morgan Asset Management for our
episode and she said, you know, she
follows what's happening among local
municipalities, state governments,
school districts, sewer systems, right?
That's a really good place to look to
gauge how is the economy doing. and she
said a recession is still not her base
case.
>> Well, and mun bonds are traditionally
something that people buy as a sort of
safe haven type investment, right? How
are things doing in the mun bond market?
Are we seeing a flight to that safety?
>> It's so interesting because the
municipal market has had a bit of a
rocky year. There's just been a ton of
bond issuance so far. It seems like
that's been absorbed by investors and
they've been willing to buy these bonds.
But it did take that market a little bit
longer to recover from liberation day
for example than maybe the stock market.
So before the government shutdown a few
days ago, I had a conversation with Nene
Jenkins, who's the head of municipal
research at JP Morgan Asset Management.
That's coming up after the break.
Nene, I'm so excited to have this
conversation because I got my start in
financial journalism as a municipal
bonds reporter. And it was just such a
fascinating space to follow. And since
then, I've been writing about stocks,
bonds, derivatives, you name it. But the
MUN market did catch my attention this
year. you know, stocks have rebounded
from their lows during liberation day
and there's kind of been this everything
rally, right, in markets, but it's been
kind of a rough patch for munis. So, I'm
excited to hear your take on the MUN
market and and what's going on there.
>> Well, if you haven't followed a munis in
a while, then you may be surprised about
what's driving it this time.
>> Yeah, what's going on?
>> A lot of the technical factors are
driving munis uh at the moment. bonds
are being issued at a very high pace and
at the same time we have seen strong
underlying credit fundamentals broadly
across the sector and we're talking
states with near peak rainy day funds.
Obviously, revenues have moderated and
there's a bit of plateauing we're seeing
with the rainy day reserves, but still
just near record high credit quality uh
across the landscape. And so this
interesting dichotomy between, you know,
the technicals driving performance and
the performance lag there. Um but it
actually has turned around over the
course of the last month. What I say is
if you have a shopping bag, it's time to
come shopping for munis.
>> Okay. Yeah. So, we saw like broader MUN
bond prices drop a lot during Liberation
Day and yields rose quite a bit. What I
observed was that they kind of stayed
elevated. Maybe they've come down a
little bit over you're saying the past
month or so, but it sounds like you're
saying a lot of that has been driven by
just municipalities, states, local
governments, school districts, higher
education institutions issuing a lot of
bonds. Is that right? That's true. And
one thing about the municipal market
that's key in this is that a lot of
municipal issuers issue for
infrastructure. They issue for capital.
They're not necessarily issuing for for
cash flows. That's very rare in our
market.
>> Right. Mun issue long, right? They issue
long.
>> These MUN bonds, you know, fund our
highways, our sewer systems, our school
districts. Like this is actual stuff
that's that's being borrowed for.
>> Exactly.
>> And that's some of what's driving the
supply. Okay.
>> Labor material costs are up 40% since
the pandemic.
>> Wo.
>> And so
it takes more money to build these
bridges, to build these roads, to build
these schools. Um so that's some a good
portion of what's driving the the
increased supply. September year to date
is showing us um some really strong
flows flows into our market tend to
happen on the front end. And so there's
this interesting steepness to the yield
curves that we're seeing where a lot of
attractiveness out out long and some
some richness on the front end.
>> Let's talk a little bit more about this
issuance. What are the types of
municipalities coming to the market and
and tell me a little bit more about why
they're borrowing?
>> Sure. We should probably go back to the
global financial crisis in this case.
>> The global financial crisis really led
to some budget stress. You'll remember a
lot of times when you were covering the
market, you saw states try to balance
their budgets and one of the things that
they did was they pulled back on
issuance.
>> There's been a depressed issuance for
about a decade and also driving a need
now to catch up with the infrastructure
spending.
>> But that's that's fascinating that there
was depressed issuance during a decade
of low interest rates. Am I hearing that
right?
>> Yeah. Uh you'll also remember that there
was quite a bit um of budget gaps that
were driven by, you know, just as the
market decreased, needing to fund their
pensions. Well, now pensions are at
record levels of funding.
Issuers have budget flexibility that
they didn't have maybe a decade ago. The
need to borrow is really strong in
certain sectors. Education is a really
great example of that where we're seeing
a lot of demographic headwinds drive an
incessant need to remain competitive in
those markets and really not continue to
delay some of the needed issuance that
needs to occur. I also think there's a
bit of policy aspect to this as well
where as part of stimulus we saw um some
legislation around supportive
infrastructure and so there's some
federal money that's helping issuers uh
fund the cost of these projects and a
need to spend it while it's still
available. I think the fundamental line
is it costs more to construct.
they they've run out of time and
the market's attractive right now for
them to issue.
>> How is the market attractive for them
with rates still relatively high?
>> What issuers have seen is that they
can't wait. Uh if we talk a bit about
the GFC again back in 2008, it was
really hard on our market. We saw a drop
in birth rates and that is pressuring
universities to become much more
competitive to a shrinking pool of
students. When you look at it on a whole
are higher education institutions just
more stressed this year because of you
know what's going on at the federal
level. I've seen some of these
institutions have their funding
threatened. Like what's going on there?
>> What we have seen is a real bifurcation
in the market. And I'll first start with
talking about you some of the pressures
you've noticed. Um on the one hand we
had some delays in federal revenues.
There is really a variety of
dependencies on federal revenues and
that impacted research institutions much
more than than other types of
universities.
We also see some changes to immigration
policy, you know, starting with delays
in in visa, right, meetings and then H1B
visas specifically target that impacts
university revenues, correct?
>> Roughly about 16% of enrollments, a lot
of that coming from China and India. And
so we are mindful of universities that
have an overdependence to this
particular population. But what we found
is that universities with strong balance
sheets that have a diversity of revenue
and income especially if they're located
in uh demographically growing areas are
doing well despite the challenge.
>> Okay,
>> we are seeing management teams adjust
and reduce uh expenses. And then uh
finally I would say there are there is a
variety of exposure to the federal
government. There are a number of
universities that just aren't as reliant
on some of those federal resources and
and are less exposed.
>> So despite everything going on at the
federal level, despite some of this
volatility we've seen in the bond
market, you're not running away from
like higher education bonds right now.
>> We're not. We we definitely still see
opportunity in the sector and we're very
cautious around some of those policy
risks and make sure to incorporate it
into our credit view. Absolutely.
>> What are you hearing from bankers and
and issuers of these bonds right now?
>> I'm hearing from them uh more recently
about clarity around
>> okay
>> policy especially when you talk to state
and local governments. You know, when we
talked about a time earlier this year
where there was a lot of uncertainty,
but the one big beautiful bill act has
been passed and that provided a lot of
clarity to issuers that did give them
some comfort moving forward that they
had a policy environment that was
understandable. A lot of states have
passed their budgets and that's been a
supportive environment for school
districts generally across the country
in that they were seeing increasing
support from the state for per people
pupil funding. And so, um, we know that
there can sometimes be transient policy
risks that can, um, rear their head. And
so, they're paying attention to policy,
but they do know that a lot of the
policy risks that are inherent are are
really a couple of years out. They're
not near-term credit risks. Let's talk
about briefly just the big beautiful
bill. What impact did that have on
municipalities and in your view like the
financials of these local
municipalities? I'm sure it's hard to
like paint it with a broad brush, but in
in general, what did you observe there?
>> As we were um analyzing the legislation
and its impact on municipal credit, the
one place where we thought the impact
might be the largest would be related to
Medicaid and really tried to understand,
you know, how that flows through the
states and ultimately to the hospitals.
And what has happened as we've done our
research is that we haven't seen any
states that say that they're going to
backfill this. And so there isn't this
expectation that it's going to drive a
series of budget gaps. So we definitely
have been looking at hospitals trying to
examine exposure to Medicaid and
governmental payers and and really
trying to understand the downstream risk
as it flows through credits. Are you
seeing this bill weigh on the financials
of local governments?
>> We have not seen evidence of that at
all. Wow.
>> Um I have seen credits try to examine
this and uh and adjust. And so in one
case we have some revenues in let's say
the state of Colorado where there's a
budget gap that is attributed to policy
actions there. We're going to need to
see states mitigate that as well.
>> Okay, we're moving on.
>> Moving on. I mean, and really think
about it. There there are lots of tax
cuts associated with uh OBBA that is
likely to be generated into refund
activity in March. And what do people do
when they get a lot of refunds?
>> That results in sales tax revenues for
the states. income tax refunds often
translate
>> into additional spending
>> and that's good for these state budgets.
>> So, there are are definitely um cases
where states are looking at the
positives and they're looking at some uh
adjustments that they need to to make
and still seeing balance in the mix.
>> So, we might be looking at a government
shutdown.
>> Yes.
>> What would that mean for the municipal
bond market? For the most part, we've
seen a lot of government shutdowns. We
have yet to see a government shutdown
result in widespread municipal credit
pressure. But what I will also say is
every single shutdown is different. And
what we need to watch for is duration.
They're usually very short. And given
the shortness of the of the shutdown,
that has tended to mean that the issuers
can use reserves. they can delay capital
spending. There's lots of different
tactics that they use to um really
navigate the US government shutdown.
Part of what needs to be determined
after the government shuts down is what
spending is discretionary and what
spending is essential. And historically,
they've said 75% of the federal
government is essential and 25% is
discretionary. that's determined by the
administration in power at the time and
there can be slight changes in what they
consider discretionary.
>> Um, one area we have seen some pressure
is really around employment levels
around DC after lots of layoffs earlier
this year. We've seen started to see a
tick up in say the unemployment rate for
the state of Maryland and um some other
related credits. And so that's something
we're watchful for because the current
administration has said that one thing
that they're looking towards if there is
a shutdown is some sort of permanent
layoff. So looking at the volume, the
intensity,
for the most part, we think the
municipal market given its lack of
direct reliance on the federal
government at a material level and their
independence has always insulated them
from the impacts of the shutdown. But
there are a few sectors and credits
where that connection is stronger.
>> So obviously one thing that would be
terrible for tax revenues, Americans,
investors, everyone would be a
recession. How worried are you about a
recession right now? I mean you analyze
municipalities finances at a very
granular level.
>> Yeah.
>> Is that something you're concerned about
right now?
>> It's not my base case.
>> Okay. Um, obviously I would include that
in my tail risk scenario and we analyze
that risk along with with a whole host
of other much more specific risks and
look to the resilience of management the
reserve quality that we've seen in
across sectors. One sector we haven't
mentioned is water and sue or public
power. Some of those essential sectors
>> they're sitting on 500 days cash right
there. There's a lot that you can do
with that level of flexibility of
reserves when that's the median in your
sector. And so, you know, a lot of those
sectors are are much more resilient than
individuals examined, which is part of
why you talk about people investing in
munis and understanding the credit
quality strength. It's why the default
rates are so low. It's why we tend to
see such strong credit quality in the
faces of of of really sharp recessions.
You know what's really interesting? I've
been following kind of publicly traded
corporations more than I've been
following municipal bonds lately. But I
think there's two common threads where
what we saw during co higher interest
rates the past few years. We saw that US
corporations were so much more resilient
than anyone thought. like they have been
able to maintain
profit margins despite inflation, all of
the stuff that's been thrown at the US
economy the past few years. And it's
fascinating to see that that's the same
thing with municipalities.
>> Yeah, we're not seeing the same the
distress you would have anticipated
given what these credits have been
through through during the pandemic.
>> They've been through.
Uh but also I would say look at what
they've been through and they're better
on the other side somehow.
>> Well, a lot of that is stimulus money,
right?
>> Upgrades have still remain uh outpaced
downgrades in our sector. There are a
few sectors where where that's reversed,
but
>> credit quality is still very high.
>> We're going to take a quick break and
then one last question for Nene Jenkins.
So, Nene, I have one last question for
you. What is the single most important
metric an investor should consider when
they're buying municipal bonds? Wow.
I have to pick just one. Well, you have
to understand that I'm a research
analyst.
>> I understand that, Minnie. I understand.
So, so one thing, um, I had I had great
mentors who train me as an analyst. I
still find it to be true. Cash is king.
Cash is king. Cash is king. It's cash.
But if I had a second one, it would be
leverage.
>> Okay, tell us more about that one.
>> Yeah, I think that coming into this
market space as we've seen a lot of
issuance, one thing that's been really
amazing is not just that this issuance
is going up, but that they can afford
the issuance because they've taken a
break. And I think capacity to fix your
problems is going to be capacity to
access the market. And if you're already
levered up, you really have limited room
to wiggle. So leverage, leverage is
going to be a pretty key number two.
Thank you so much, Nene. This has been
awesome.
>> All right. Thank you, Gunen.
[Music]
>> Are you still bearish on Chicago and
Chicago Board of Ed? Oh, no. You were
bullish on Chicago. I'm sorry. I'm like
referencing your takes from a decade
ago. Decade ago.
[Music]